Improve OpenTelemetry docs, fix #5688 (#5748)
elastic/apm-server: docs/guide/opentelemetry-elastic.asciidoc

instrumentation to quickly analyze distributed traces and metrics to help you monitor
business KPIs and technical components with the {stack}.

[[open-telemetry-elastic-protocol]]
==== APM Server native support of OpenTelemetry protocol

> IMPORTANT: The https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/elasticexporter#legacy-opentelemetry-collector-exporter-for-elastic[OpenTelemetry Collector exporter for Elastic]
> is deprecated since Elastic observability 7.13 and replaced by the native support of the OpenTelemetry Line Protocol in
> Elastic Observability (aka OTLP). See the
> https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/elasticexporter#migration[migration guide].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: The https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/elasticexporter#legacy-opentelemetry-collector-exporter-for-elastic[OpenTelemetry Collector exporter for Elastic]
was deprecated in 7.13 and replaced by the native support of the OpenTelemetry Line Protocol in
Elastic Observability (OTLP). To learn more, see 
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/elasticexporter#migration[migration].
```

Elastic APM Server natively supports the OpenTelemetry protocol.
This means trace data and metrics collected from your applications and infrastructure can
be sent directly to Elastic APM Server using the OpenTelemetry protocol.

> image::images/open-telemetry-protocol-arch.png[OpenTelemetry Elastic architecture diagram]

Reviewer 2: Great diagram

Author: thanks

| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` | APM Server URL. The host and port that APM Server listens for events on.

| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS` | Authorization header that includes the Elastic APM Secret token or API key: `"Authorization=Bearer an_apm_secret_token"` or `"Authorization=ApiKey an_api_key"`.

For information on how to format an API key, see our {apm-server-ref-v}/api-key.html[API key] docs.

Please note the required space between `Bearer` and `an_apm_secret_token`, and `APIKey` and `an_api_key`.

| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_CERTIFICATE` | Certificate for TLS credentials of the gRPC client. (optional)

|===

> You are now ready to collect traces and <<open-telemetry-elastic-metrics,metrics>>, <<open-telemetry-elastic-verify,verify metrics>>,
> and <<open-telemetry-elastic-kibana,visualize metrics>> in {kib}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are now ready to collect traces and <<open-telemetry-elastic-metrics,metrics>> before <<open-telemetry-elastic-verify,verifying metrics>>
and <<open-telemetry-elastic-kibana,visualizing metrics>> in {kib}.
```

[[open-telemetry-collector]]
===== Connect OpenTelemetry Collector instances

> When using the OpenTelemetry Collector instances in your architecture, you can connect them to Elastic Observability using the OTLP exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the OpenTelemetry collector instances in your architecture, you can connect them to Elastic Observability using the OTLP exporter.
```

> +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

[source,yaml]
----
receivers: <1>
  # ...
  otlp:

processors: <2>
  # ...
  memory_limiter:
    check_interval: 1s
    limit_mib: 2000
  batch:

exporters:
  logging:
    loglevel: warn <3>
  otlp/elastic: <4>
    # Elastic APM server https endpoint without the "https://" prefix
    endpoint: "${ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_ENDPOINT}" <5> <7>
    headers:
      # Elastic APM Server secret token
      Authorization: "Bearer ${ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_TOKEN}" <6> <7>

service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [logging, otlp/elastic]
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [logging, otlp/elastic]
----

> <1> The receivers that matter to your use case such as
> the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/otlpreceiver[OTLP receiver] to forward data emitted by APM agents or the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/hostmetricsreceiver[Host Metrics receiver],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> The receivers, such as
the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/otlpreceiver[OTLP receiver], that forward data emitted by APM agents or the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/hostmetricsreceiver[host metrics receiver].
```

> <2> The processors that matter to your use case ; Elastic recommends using the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/batchprocessor/README.md[Batch processor] and suggests also using the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/memorylimiter/README.md[Memory Limiter processor]. More recommandations are available on https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/README.md#recommended-processors[OpenTelemetry Collector / Recommended Processors],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> We recommend using the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/batchprocessor/README.md[Batch processor] and also suggest using the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/memorylimiter/README.md[memory limiter processor]. For more information, see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/README.md#recommended-processors[Recommended processors].
```

> <3> The https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/loggingexporter[Logging exporter] is convenient for troubleshooting, supported logging levels: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, and `error`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> The https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/loggingexporter[logging exporter] is helpful for troubleshooting and supports various logging levels: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, and `error`.
```

> <4> Elastic Observability endpoint configuration. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlpexporter[OpenTelemetry Collector > OTLP gRPC exporter] documentation for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<4> Elastic Observability endpoint configuration. To learn more, see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlpexporter[OpenTelemetry Collector > OTLP gRPC exporter].
```

> <5> Hostname and port of the APM Server endpoint (e.g. `elastic-apm-server:8200`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<5> Hostname and port of the APM Server endpoint. For example, `elastic-apm-server:8200`.
```

> <6> Credential for Elastic APM {apm-server-ref-v}/secret-token.html[secret token authorization] (e.g. `Authorization: "Bearer a_secret_token"`) or {apm-server-ref-v}/api-key.html[API key authorization] (e.g. `Authorization: "ApiKey an_api_key"`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<6> Credential for Elastic APM {apm-server-ref-v}/secret-token.html[secret token authorization] (`Authorization: "Bearer a_secret_token"`) or {apm-server-ref-v}/api-key.html[API key authorization] (`Authorization: "ApiKey an_api_key"`).
```

> <7> Note that environment-specific configuration parameters can be conveniently passed in as environment variables as documented https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables[here] (e.g. `ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_ENDPOINT` and `ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_TOKEN`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<7> Environment-specific configuration parameters can be conveniently passed in as environment variables documented https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables[here] (e.g. `ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_ENDPOINT` and `ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_TOKEN`).
```

* Sample Terraform code: https://github.com/cyrille-leclerc/my-serverless-shopping-cart/tree/main/checkout-function/deploy
* Note that the Terraform code to manage the HTTP API Gateway (https://github.com/cyrille-leclerc/my-serverless-shopping-cart/tree/main/utils/terraform/api-gateway-proxy[here]) is copied from the official OpenTelemetry Lambda sample https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/tree/e72467a085a2a6e57af133032f85ac5b8bbbb8d1/utils[here]

[[elastic-open-telemetry-known-limitations]]

> ==== Known limitations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Limitations in 7.13
```

> ===== Known limitations in Elastic Observability 7.13

Reviewer: This section title can be removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> * OpenTelemetry traces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[elastic-open-telemetry-traces-limitations]]
===== OpenTelemetry traces

```

> ** Traces of applications using `messaging` semantics might be wrongly displayed or not shown at all in Elastic APM UI. You might see only `spans` coming from such services, but no `transaction`.
> *** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5094[[OpenTelemetry\] Map OpenTelemetry `messaging.*` semantic conventions to Elastic Common Schema #5094]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Traces of applications using `messaging` semantics might be wrongly displayed or not shown in the APM UI. You may only see `spans` coming from such services, but no `transaction` https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5094[#5094]
```

> ** Inability to see Stack traces in spans or in general, arbitrary span events for applications instrumented with OpenTelemetry
> *** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/4715[[OpenTelemetry\] Support OpenTelemetry Span Events #4715]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Inability to see Stack traces in spans or, in general, arbitrary span events for applications instrumented with OpenTelemetry https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/4715[#4715]
```

> ** Inability in APM views to view the "Time Spent by Span Type"
> ** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5747[[OpenTelemetry\] The graph "Time spent by span type" is empty #5747]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Inability in APM views to view the "Time Spent by Span Type" https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5747[#5747]
```

> ** Metrics derived from traces (Throughput, Latency and Errors) are not accurate when traces are sampled before being ingested by Elastic Observability (ie by an OpenTelemetry Collector or OpenTelemetry APM agent or SDK)
> *** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm/issues/472[[OpenTelemetry\] Metrics derived from traces (Throughput, Latency and Errors) are not accurate when traces are sampled before being ingested by Elastic Observability #472]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Metrics derived from traces (throughput, latency, and errors) are not accurate when traces are sampled before being ingested by Elastic Observability (ie by an OpenTelemetry Collector or OpenTelemetry APM agent or SDK) https://github.com/elastic/apm/issues/472[#472]

```

> * OpenTelemetry Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[elastic-open-telemetry-metrics-limitations]]
===== OpenTelemetry metrics

```

> ** OpenTelemetry histogram metrics, https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/latest/io/opentelemetry/api/metrics/DoubleValueRecorder.html[`DoubleValueRecorder`]
> and https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/latest/io/opentelemetry/api/metrics/LongValueObserver.html[`LongValueRecorder`], are not yet supported
> *** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/3195[Histogram Support #3195]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* OpenTelemetry histogram metrics, https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/latest/io/opentelemetry/api/metrics/DoubleValueRecorder.html[`DoubleValueRecorder`]
and https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/latest/io/opentelemetry/api/metrics/LongValueObserver.html[`LongValueRecorder`], are not yet supported https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/3195[#3195]
```

> ** Inability to see JVM metrics in Elastic APM UI for Java applications instrumented with OpenTelemetry
> *** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/4919[Visualize JVM health indicators collected by the OpenTelemetry Java Agent #4919]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Inability to see JVM metrics in Elastic APM UI for Java applications instrumented with OpenTelemetry https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/4919[#4919]
```

> ** Inability to see Host metrics in Elastic Metrics Infrastructure view when using the OpenTelemetry Collector Host Metrics receiver
> *** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5310[Map the metrics of the OpenTelemetry Collector Host Metrics Receiver to ECS and store them in the metrics- indices #5310]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Inability to see host metrics in Elastic Metrics Infrastructure view when using the OpenTelemetry Collector host metrics receiver https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5310[#5310]

```

> * OpenTelemetry logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[elastic-open-telemetry-logs-limitations]]
===== OpenTelemetry logs

```

> ** OpenTelemetry logs are not yet supported
> *** See issue https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5491[[OpenTelemetry\] add support for receiving logs #5491]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* OpenTelemetry logs are not yet supported https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/5491[#5491]
```
